# 1.1 System of linear equations
2023-04-18 | 21:52
{Subject}:[[MTHS 212]]
{Section}:[[1.0 Linear Equations in Linear Algebra]]
{Tags}: #Mathematics #LinearAlgebra 
{Related}:

--- 
#### Linear Equation
A `linear equation` in the variables $x_1 ,...,x_n$ is an equation that can be written in the form

$$ a_1x_1 +a_2x_2 +... + a_nx_n=b $$

where b and the `coefficients` $a_1,...,a_n$ are real or complex numbers that are usually known in advance.

---
#### System of Linear Equations
A `system of linear equations` (or a `linear system`) is a collection of one or more linear equations involving the same variables - say, $x_1,...,x_n$.

---
#### Solutions
A `solution` of the system is a list $(s_1,s_2,...,s_n)$ of numbers that makes each equation a true statement when the values $s_1,...,s_n$ are substituted for $x_1,...,x_n$, respectively.

---
The set of all possible solutions is called the `solution set` of linear system.

Two linear systems are called `equivalent` if they have the same solution set.

A system of linear equations has

1.  `no` solution, or
2.  exactly `one` solution, or
3.  `infinitely` many solutions.

A system of linear equations is said to be `consistent` if it has either one solution or infinitely many solutions and `inconsistent` if it has no solution.

---
### Matrix Notation

The essential information of a linear system can be recorded compactly in a rectangular array called a `matrix`. Given the system

$$ \begin{aligned} x_1-2x_2+x_3 &=0 \\ 0 +2x_2-8x_3&=8 \\ 5x_1+0 - 5x_3&=10 \end{aligned} $$

with the coefficients of each variable aligned in columns, the matrix

$$ \begin{bmatrix} 1 & -2 & 1 \\ 0 & 2 & -8 \\ 5 & 0 & -5 \end{bmatrix} $$

is called the `coefficient matrix`(or `matrix of coefficients`) of the system

$$ \begin{bmatrix} 1 & -2 & 1 &0 \\ 0&2&-8&8 \\ 5&0&-5&10 \end{bmatrix} $$

is called the `augmented matrix` of the system.

The `size` of a matrix tells us how many rows and columns it has - say $m \times n ~ matrix$

---
### ELEMENTARY ROW OPERATIONS

1.  (`Replacement`) Replace one row by the sum of itself and a multiple of another row.1
2.  (`Interchange`) Interchange two rows.
3.  (`Scaling`) Multiply all entries in a row by a nonzero constant.

Two matrices are called `row equivalent` if there is a sequence of elementary row operations that transforms one matrix into the other.

If the augmented matrices of two linear systems are `row equivalent`, then the two systems have the same solution set

### Existence and Uniqueness Questions

TWO FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS ABOUT A LINEAR SYSTEM

1.  Is the system `consistent`; that is, does at least one solution exist?
2.  If a solution exists, is it the only one; that is, is the solution `unique`?
--- 
{Efundi Lecture Notes}: [Linear Equations](https://efundi.nwu.ac.za/access/content/group/817a5310-2926-4371-b648-3ebbadbc88cd/Lecture%20notes%20_%20Lesing%20notas/English/MTHS212%20-%20Study%20Unit%201.1%20-%20Systems%20of%20Linear%20Equations.pdf)