# 1.1 Why Databases
2024-02-14 | 17:20
{Subject}:[[CMPG 311]]
{Section}:[[Chapter 1 - Database Systems]]
{Tags}: #Programming #Databases 
{Related}: [[CMPG 221]]

--- 
### Why Databases?
- Data today is ubiquitous.
- It is pervasive.
- There are many sources: Manual/Automatic/Sensors

Databases make data persistent and shareable in a secure way.
- Specialized structure that allow computers-based systems to store, manage and retrieve data very quickly.
---

# Data versus Information
---

### Data
- Consists of raw facts and have not yet been processed to reveal their meaning to the end user.
- It is the building blocks of information.
#### Data Management
- A process that focus on the collection, storage and retrieval of data.
---
### Information
- Produced by processing raw data to reveal meaning.
	- Requires context.
	- Bedrock of knowledge.
	- Should be accurate, relevant, and timely to enable good decision making.
---
## Introducing the *Database*
- Shared, integrated computer structure that stores a collection of:
	- **End-user data:** raw facts of interest to end user
	- **Metadata**: data about data, through which the end-user data is integrated and managed.
		- Describes data characteristics and relationships.
- Database management system (DBMS)
	- Collection of programs.
	- manages database structure.
	- Controls access to data stored in the database.
---
## Roles and Advantages of the DBMS
- `Database management system (DBMS): Serves as intermediary between the user and the database.`
	- Enables data to be shared.
	- presents the end-user with an integrated view of data.
	- Provides more efficient and effective data management.
### Advantages of the DBMS
- Better data integration and less data inconsistency
- `Data inconsistency`: Different versions of the same data appear in different places.
- Increased end-user productivity
- Improved:
	- Data sharing
	- Data Security
	- Data Access
	- Decision making
- `Data quality`: Accuracy, validity, and timeliness of data.
---
## DB Systems - Types of Databases
- `Users and Size`.
- `Single-user database`: supports one user at a time
- `Desktop database`: single-user database on a personal computer.
- `Multiuser database`: supports multiple users at the same time
- `Workgroup databases`: supports a small number of users or a specific department.
- `Enterprise database`: supports many across many departments.
---
- Classification by `data type`
	- General-purpose database: contains a wide variety of data used in multiple disciplines.
	- Discipline-specific database: contains data focused on specific subject areas.
	- Operational database: designed to support a company's day-to-day operations.
---
- `Analytical database`: stores historical data and business metrics. Used for tactical or strategic decision making.
	- Data warehouse: Store data in a format optimized for decision support.
	- Online analytical processing (OLAP) Front end: tools for retrieving processing, and modeling data from data warehouse.
	These have evolved...
	- Business intelligence: captures and processes business data to generate information that support decision making.
---
- Databases can be classified to reflect the degree to which the data is structured
	- Unstructured data exists in its original (raw) state.
	- Semi structured data: processed to some extent.
	- Structured data results from formatting
		- Structure is applied based on type of processing to be performed
- Extensible Markup Language (XML) DB
	- Represents data elements in textual forma
---
## Database Design

- Well-designed databases:
	- facilitates data management and
	- generates accurate and valuable information.
- Poorly designed database:
	- causes difficult-to-trace errors
	- lead to poor decision making

Even a good DBMS will have poor performance with a poorly designed database.

---
## Evolution of File System Data Processing

1. Accomplished through a system of file folders and filing cabinets.
2. Data processing (DP) specialist: Created a computer-based system that would track data and produce required reports.
3. File System Redux: Modern end-user productivity tools. Includes spreadsheet programs such as Microsoft Excel.
### Historical Roots:
Manual File systems:
- Collection of file folders in a cabinet
- Organization within folders based on data's expected use (ideally logically related)
- System adequate for small amounts of data with few reporting requirements.
- Finding and using data in growing collections of file folders became time-consuming and cumbersome.

### Basic File Terminology
- `Data`: Raw facts, such as a telephone number. Data has little meaning if it isn't organized in some logical manner.
- `Field`: A Character or group of characters (alphabetic or numeric) that has a specific meaning. A field is used to define and store data.
- `Record`: A logically connected set of one or more fields that describes a an object.
- `File`: A collection of related records.
### Problems in File System Data Processing
Problems within file systems challenge the types of information that can be created from data as well as information accuracy.
- Lengthy development times.
- Difficulty of getting quick answers.
- Complex systems administration.
- Lack of security and limited data sharing.
- Extensive programming.
### Structural and Data Dependence
- Structural dependence
	- Access to fule is dependent on its own structure.
	- All file systems programs are modified to conform to a new file structure.
- Structural independence
	- File structure is changed without affecting the application's ability to access the data.
- Data dependence
	- Data access changes when data storage characteristics change.
- Data independence
	- Data storage characteristics are changed without affecting the program's ability to access the data.

Practical significance of data dependence is the difference between logical and physical format.

### Data Redundancy


---
{Efundi Lecture Notes}: [1.1 Why Databases](https://onedrive.live.com/edit?action=edit&id=85716AC013AE135C!72007&resid=85716AC013AE135C!72007&ithint=file%2cpptx&ct=1707923820824&wdNewAndOpenCt=1707923820824&wdPreviousSession=bbd546bd-eb34-405c-b73f-edc48b428f91&wdOrigin=OFFICECOM-WEB.MAIN.UPLOAD&wdo=2&cid=85716ac013ae135c)