# 1.2 Row Reduction and Ecelon Forms
2023-04-18 | 21:54
{Subject}:[[MTHS 212]]
{Section}:[[1.0 Linear Equations in Linear Algebra]]
{Tags}: #Mathematics #LinearAlgebra 
{Related}:

--- 
Definitions

-   A `nonzero` row contains at least one nonzero entry.
-   A `leading entry` of a row refers to the leftmost nonzero entry (in a nonzero row).

A rectangular matrix is in `(row) echelon form)` if it has the following three properties:

1.  All nonzero rows are above any rows of all zeros.
2.  Each leading entry of a row is in a column to the right of the leading entry of the row above it.
3.  All entries in a column below a leading entry are zeros.

If a matrix in echelon form satisfies the following additional conditions, then it is in `reduced (row) echelon form`: 
4. The `leading entry` in each nonzero row is 1. 
5. Each leading 1 is the only `nonzero` entry in its column.

An `(reduced) echelon matrix` is one that is in (reduced) echelon form.

---
### Theorem 1

**Uniqueness of the reduced echelon matrix**

`Each` matrix is row equivalent to `one` and only one `reduced` echelon matrix.

Each matrix $A$ is row equivalent to a unique to (one and only one) reduced echelon matrix $U$. (We call $U$ a (row) echelon form of $A$).

---

### Row reduction Algorithm: 
Write down the augmented matrix of the system and perform the following steps. 
1. Begin with the left most nonzero column. This is the pivot column. The pivot position first element of this column. 
2. Select a nonzero entry in the pivot column as a pivot. If necessary, interchange rows to move this entry into the pivot position. 
3. Use row replacement operations to create zeros in all positions below the pivot. 
4. Cover (or ignore) the row containing the pivot position and cover all rows, if any, above it. Apply steps 1-3 to the submatrix that remains. Repeat the process untill there are no more nonzero rows to modify. 
5. Beginnning with the rightmost pivot and working upward and to the left, create zeros above each pivot. If a pivot is not 1, make it 1 by a scaling operation

---

### Pivot Positions

A `pivot position` in a matrix $A$ is a location in $A$ that corresponds to a leading 1 in the reduced echelon form of $A$.

A `pivot column` is a column of $A$ that contains a pivot position.

The variables that correspond to the pivot columns in the matrix, are called the `basic` (or `dependent` or `constrained`) variables. The other variables are called the `free` (or `independent` or `unconstrained`) variables.

---
### Theorem 2

Existence and uniqueness theorem

A linear system is `consistent` if and only if the rightmost column (i.e. after the vertical line) of the augmented matrix is not a pivot column— i.e., if and only if an echelon form of the augmented matrix has no row of the form

$$ \begin{bmatrix}0&...&0 &|& b \end{bmatrix}\hspace{1 cm} with \space b \space nonzero. $$

If a linear system is consistent, then the solution set contains either (i) a `unique solution`, when there are no free variables, or (ii) `infinitely many solutions`, when there is at least one free variable.

---

USING ROW REDUCTION TO SOLVE A LINEAR SYSTEM

1.  Write the augmented matrix of the system.
2.  Use the row reduction algorithm to obtain an equivalent augmented matrix in echelon form. Decide whether the system is consistent. If there is no solution, stop; otherwise, go to the next step.
3.  Continue row reduction to obtain the reduced echelon form.
4.  Write the system of equations corresponding to the matrix obtained in step 3.
5.  Rewrite each nonzero equation from step 4 so that its one basic variable is expressed in terms of any free variables appearing in the equation.
--- 
{Efundi Lecture Notes}: [Row reduced and Echelon Forms](https://efundi.nwu.ac.za/access/content/group/817a5310-2926-4371-b648-3ebbadbc88cd/Lecture%20notes%20_%20Lesing%20notas/English/MTHS212%20-%20Study%20Unit%201.2%20-%20Row%20Reduction%20and%20Echelon%20Forms.pdf)