# 1.4 The Matrix Equation
2023-04-18 | 21:57
{Subject}:[[MTHS 212]]
{Section}:[[1.0 Linear Equations in Linear Algebra]]
{Tags}: #Mathematics #LinearAlgebra 
{Related}:

--- 
A matrix equation is an equation of the form $A \vec x = \vec b$, where `A` is a matrix, $\vec x$ is a vector, and $\vec b$ is a vector. The goal is to find the values of $\vec x$ that satisfy the equation. This type of equation can be used to represent a system of linear equations in a compact and efficient way. Solving a matrix equation often involves finding the inverse of the matrix `A`, which allows us to isolate $\vec x$ on one side of the equation.

If $A$ is an $m×n$ matrix, with columns $\vec a_1,\vec a_2,\dots,\vec a_n$ an and if $\vec x \in \mathbb{R}^n$, then the product of $A$ and $x$, denoted by $A\vec x$, is the linear combination of the columns of $A$ using the corresponding entries in $\vec x$ as weights that is
$$
A\vec x=\begin{bmatrix}\vec a_1 & \dots & \vec a_n \end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ \vdots \\ x_n \end{bmatrix}=x_1\vec a_1 + \dots + x_n\vec a_n
$$
### Theorem 3
If A is an m × n matrix, with columns a1 , a2 , . . . , an and if b ∈ R m, the matrix equation Ax = b, has the same solution set as the vector equation
$$x_1\vec a_1 + \dots + x_n\vec a_n = \vec b$$which in turn, has the same solution set as the system of linear equations whose augmented matrix is
$$ \begin{bmatrix}\vec a_1&\vec a_2&...&\vec a_n&|&\vec b\end{bmatrix} $$
### Existence of Solutions

The equation $A \vec x = \vec b$ has a solution if and only if $\vec b$ is a linear combination of the columns of `A`.

### Theorem 4
Let $A$ be an $m × n$ matrix. Then the following statements are logically equivalent. That is, for a given $A$, all the statements are either true, or they are all false. 
1. For each $b\in \mathbb{R}^m$, the equation $A\vec x =\vec b$ has a solution. 
2. Each $\vec b \in \mathbb{R}^m$ is a linear combination of the columns of $A$. 
3. The columns of $A$ span $\mathbb{R}^m$. 
4. $A$ has a pivot position in every row

### Row-vector rule to compute $A\vec x$
If the product $A \vec x$ is defined, then the `i`-th entry in $A \vec x$ is equal to the sum of the products of the corresponding entries from row `i` of `A` and from the vector $\vec x$. In other words, the `i`-th entry of the product $A \vec x$ is obtained by taking the dot product of row `i` of `A` and the column vector $\vec x$.

### Theorem 5
If $A$ is an $m × n$ matrix, $\vec u$ and $\vec v$ are vectors in $\mathbb{R}^n$, and $c$ is a scalar, then: 
1. $A(\vec u + \vec v) = A\vec u + A\vec v$; 
2. $A(c\vec u) = cA\vec u$

--- 
{Efundi Lecture Notes}: [The Matrix Equation](https://efundi.nwu.ac.za/access/content/group/dcb035b6-0c04-4a4b-ae6d-f100a884060e/Lecture%20notes/Mr%20Majozi/MTHS%20212%20Leergedeelte%201.4.pdf)