# 2.3 Characterization of Invertible Matrices
2023-04-18 | 21:38
{Subject}:[[MTHS 212]]
{Section}:[[2.0 Matrix Algebra]]
{Tags}: #Mathematics #LinearAlgebra 
{Related}:

--- 
### Theorem 8

Let $ğ´$ be a square $ğ‘› Ã— ğ‘›$ matrix. Then the following are equivalent:

1.  $A$ is an invertible matrix.
2.  $A$ is row equivalent to the identity matrix.
3.  $A$ has $n$ pivot positions.
4.  The equation $A\vec x=\vec 0$ has only the trivial solution.
5.  The columns of $A$ form a linearly independent set.
6.  The linear transformation $\vec x \rightarrow A\vec x$ is one to one.
7.  The equation $A\vec x = \vec b$ has at least one solution for each $\vec b$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$.
8.  The columns of $A$ span $\mathbb{R}^n$.
9.  The linear transformation $\vec x \rightarrow A \vec x$ maps $\mathbb{R}^n$ onto $\mathbb{R}^n$.
10.  There is an $n \times n$ matrix $C$ such that $CA = I$
11.  There is an $n \times n$ matrix $D$ such that $AD = I$.
12.  $A^T$ is an invertible matrix.

### Definition

A Linear transformation $T:\mathbb{R}^n\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^n$ is said to be `invertible` if there exists a function $S:\mathbb{R}^n\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^n$ such that $S(T(\vec x))=\vec x$, for all $\vec x$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$ and $T(S(\vec x))=\vec x$ for all $\vec x$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$. We call $S$ the inverse of $T$ and write it as $T^{-1}$.

### Theorem 9

Let $ğ‘‡: â„^ğ‘› â†’ â„^ğ‘›$ be a linear transformation and let $ğ´$ be the standard matrix for $ğ‘‡$. Then $ğ‘‡$ is invertible if and only if $ğ´$ is an invertible matrix. In that case the linear transformation $ğ‘†$ given by $ğ‘†(\vec x) = ğ´^{âˆ’1}\vec x$ is the unique function that satisfies equations 1 and 2 in the definition of an invertible transformation.

Proof:
--- 
{Efundi Lecture Notes}:[Characterization of Invertible Matrices](https://efundi.nwu.ac.za/access/content/group/dcb035b6-0c04-4a4b-ae6d-f100a884060e/Lecture%20notes/Mr%20Majozi/MTHS%20212%20Leergedeelte%203.3.pdf)