# 5.2 The Characteristic Equation
2023-05-08 | 18:42
{Subject}:[[MTHS 212]]
{Section}:[[5.0 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors]]
{Tags}: #Mathematics #LinearAlgebra 
{Related}:

--- 
**Invertible matrix theorem(continued)**
Let $A$ be an $n\times n$ matrix. Then $A$ is invertible if and only if:
12. The number $0$ is not an eigenvalue of $A$.
13. The determinant of $A$ is not zero.

---
**Theorem 3:**
Let $A$ and $B$ be $n\times n$ matrices.
1. $A$ is invertible if and only if $\det A \neq 0$.
2. $\det AB = (\det A)(\det B)$.
3. $\det A^T=\det A$.
4. If $A$ is triangular, then $\det A$ is the product of the entries on the mail diagonal of $A$.
5. A row replacement operation on $A$ does not change the determinant. A row interchange changes the sign of the determinant. A row scaling also scales the determinant by the same factor.

---
**The Characteristic Equation**
We define the `characteristic equation` for an $n\times n$ matrix $A$ as the scalar equation
$$
\det (A-\lambda I)=0
$$
A scalar $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue if and only if it is a solution of the characteristic equation.

---
**The characteristic polynomial and algebraic multiplicity**
The polynomial $\det (A-\lambda I)$ is called the characteristic polynomial and the number if time a factor $(\lambda-q)$ appears in the factorization of characteristic polynomial, is called algebraic multiplicity of the eigenvalue $\lambda=q$.

---
**Geometric multiplicity**
The geometric multiplicity of an eigenvalue $\lambda$ of a matrix $A$ is defined as the dimension of the eigenspace corresponding to $\lambda$.

---
**Similarity:**
Let $A$ and $B$ be $n Ã— n$ matrices. We say $A$ is similar to $B$ if there exists an invertible matrix $P$ such that $P^âˆ’1AP = B$, or, equivalently, $A = PBP^âˆ’1$.
**Remark:**
If $A$ is similar to $B$ ğ‘¤ğ‘–ğ‘¡â„ $P^âˆ’1PA = B$ ğ‘ğ‘›ğ‘‘ ğ‘¤ğ‘’ ğ‘¤ğ‘Ÿğ‘–ğ‘¡ğ‘’ $Q = P^âˆ’1$ , then we get $QAQ^âˆ’1 = B$, that is, $B$ is similar to $A$. Therefore we simply say $A$ and $B$ are similar.

---
**Theorem 4:**
If the $n Ã— n$ matrices $A$ and $B$ are similar, then they have the same characteristic polynomial and hence the same eigenvalues (with the same algebraic multiplicities).

--- 
{Efundi Lecture Notes}: [5.2 The Characteristic Equation](https://efundi.nwu.ac.za/access/content/group/dcb035b6-0c04-4a4b-ae6d-f100a884060e/Lecture%20notes/Mr%20Majozi/MTHS%20212%20Leergedeelte%206.2.pdf)